once around
Caster. So Caster is one of the two main
stars in the constellation of Gemini,
one of the constellations of the zodiac
where we find the ecliptic and the path
of the planets as they journey round the
sky.
And it's designated alpha, alpha
geminorium. But it shouldn't be because
alpha is supposed to be reserved for the
brightest star. And in
fact, caster is magnitude
1.58 and pollock is about half a
magnitude brighter, but gets the
designation beta. U this is a common
problem. It's some of the other
constellations seem to have alpha and
beta the wrong way round. And I I can
rationalize it in those cases in the
case of Orion for example because Bettle
is much higher in the sky than Riel. And
so although Riel is truly brighter when
viewed from the uh typical observing
station, it's lower in the sky and
suffers more extinction. But that
doesn't really apply here because Caster
and Pock are really quite close
together. and uh from many European
sites they're considerably higher in the
sky. So I don't get this updown as to
why this is
backwards. Anyway, the fascinating thing
about caster, which we often observe
during our public open evenings at the
University of Cambridge, is that when we
look at it through our fairly modest
amateur grade telescopes, we have a 8 in
and a 14 in ME Schmidt cassagrain into
which we plug
cameras. We can get images like this.
And what we see is that caster itself
turns into three stars. You have the two
in the center there, the white ones, a
bright one and a dim one, so called A
and B. And they're about six arc seconds
apart. So our equipment can fairly
easily split them into a pair. And then
rather fainter is the C star, which has
that red color um and is 71 arcsec,
considerably further, and very easy to
split, but quite hard to spot because
it's fairly faint.
Now this system is about 49 or 50 light
years away as revealed by the parallax
method. You use the earth's orbit as a
baseline. So the diameter of the earth's
orbit is twice the radius. The radius is
one astronomical unit. 150 million
kilometers. So it's 300 million
kilometers across the diameter. And that
gives us a very long baseline. But still
it's a very very long way out to the
stars. So the triangles here are
actually very very thin and long out to
the stars. But what we can do is for the
nearestish stars like Caster, we can
determine the distance by measuring the
change in its position against the
immense distances of the background
stars which don't seem to move at all.
So 49 and a bit 50 light years fairly
nearby
really. Now when we turn professional
instruments to the caster system and we
look at the spectrum of the light
splitting it up into all its component
colors you can see the dark lines in the
spectrum the so-called frownhoffer lines
where particular elements and molecules
in the atmospheres of those stars take a
chunk at a particular energy or
wavelength out of the spectral
light creating a pattern of dark lines.
You can see that there are in fact two
stars present in each case. You can see
two sets of lines and that they change
position relative to each other based on
the Doppler effect whether the star is
moving towards or away from you. And
what we find with caster is that we in
fact have six stars. So what we see as a
is in fact a a the main bright star with
a b a little red dwarf orbiting around
it. And it's easy for me to remember cuz
it's 9.2 days. Whereas in the case of
the fainter star B A, it has a little
red dwarf BB going around it and you
just reverse the digits 2.9 days. And
then the sea star that looks red to us
is in fact a pair of faint red dwarfs
and they orbit each other in just 18
hours. So a complicated cosmic dance of
this six star
system. This is a comparison of the
sizes of the stars. So you have the AA
star as the largest uh bright hot white
star bigger than our sun shown at the
right there for comparison.
BA is slightly smaller, slightly
fainter, and their red dwarf companions
are roughly equal in size, AB and BB.
And then you have CA and CB. They're
also red dwarfs. So if we look at the AB
pair for a moment, AA and AB are both A
type main sequence
stars, somewhat hotter than the sun. The
larger of the two, AA, is 2.3 times the
mass of our sun and has a temperature of
10,000 Kelvin. So really quite hot
indeed. BA is a little smaller, 1.8
times the sun's mass and with a slightly
lower temperature,
8,800. For
comparison, our sun is
5,800. So rather
cooler. Now BA shows a lot of metal
lines in its spectrum. So it's actually
classified as an AM star. But uh that's
a detail
really. The B components. So AB and BB
are both 40% the mass of the sun. 0.4 M
soul as we would say and red dwarf
stars. Now A and B orbit each other in
46 years. And as I said, the AA and AB
stars, it's 9.2 days, and the BA and BB
stars 2.9 days. So much closer. And the
whole lot seems to have an age of around
290 million years. That's nothing
because the sun is 20 times older than
that. This is only barely enough to have
done one lap of the galaxy. 290 million
years. Our son's been around 20
times. The C pair, the red dwarfs, are
also sometimes called Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y
Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y
Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y G G G
Geminorium, given a catalog designation
of that. And they're slightly larger,
0.6, so 60% of the sun's mass, a little
bit bigger than the other two small red
dwarfs. And curiously, these have an age
that's a bit older, 370 million years.
So, they're somewhat older than the A
and B stars. Um, and that's a curiosity.
Now, there has been some debate about
whether or not the C pair are actually
in orbit around the AB pair in a very
very long orbit of thousands of years or
whether they were just passing by. And
obviously that age difference may be a
factor in trying to determine that. Now
the other curious thing about the C pair
is that they form what's called an
eclipsing binary. So every now and
again one of the pair hides behind the
other from our line of sight and you get
a very regular dip in the brightness as
shown in the graph at the top there. The
light curve for y
geminorium. So you can see the uh
19.54 hour period. Think I said 18
earlier but
19.54 is the uh true period there of the
rotation or the revolution going around
of the uh these eclipsing events.
They're of course orbiting their common
center of mass.
So right, the other thing about all of
these red dwarfs, and this is a common
fact with many red dwarfs, is that they
are flare stars. And the activity on the
surface, and the flares created are
immense. A lot of X-rays and a lot of
radiation pouring off these stars. This
is because they're in their youth. 370
or 290 million years is quite young for
a star. And it takes a long time, maybe
400 million years, for a red dwarf star
to settle down to a long-term stable uh
existence. And they do live a trillion
years. We think the universe just not
old enough for any of them to really
have used up any significant part of
their fuel. They run so efficiently on
economy and use all the hydrogen in the
envelope whereas larger stars are
terribly terribly inefficient really.
Um, now that flare star behavior is a
worry for the point of view of life on
planets around red dwarf stars because
these flares are very very dangerous to
the atmosphere or indeed to the
biosphere of anything on orbiting
planets.
To be warm enough to be in the
Goldilocks zone, the habitable zone, you
have to be up close and personal to a
red dwarf, in order to get enough heat
to bring the temperature up to the point
where water can exist as a liquid. We
think maybe there are other ways that
life can take hold in colder
temperatures. Who knows? But to be that
close to be in the Goldilock zone puts
you at risk from these flares. So there
is some belief that red dwarf stars are
a very bad idea for hosting life. Now
one thing that we've also recently got
evidence for is a substellar companion
to the sea pair. So a fifth member of
the group. But this isn't really a star.
This is a failed star, a brown dwarf.
and it's in about a 50-year long orbit
around the sea
pair if it's there. This is speculative
at this stage. It's not absolutely being
confirmed, but it would be interesting
to find that there is at least one more
member. And I wouldn't be surprised at
all if we don't find many more items
within this complicated system. So,
that's what we know about the star
Caster, one of the bright stars in the
constellation of Gemini. And I hope
you've enjoyed that little tour around
it. Thanks very much.